JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: a
deep dive into
the fight to replace the
Affordable Care Act
-- what the Republicans health
care could
mean for millions of Americans.
Also ahead this Wednesday:
LEON PANETTA, Former U.S.
Secretary of Defense:
This has been seriously damaging
to the CIA
and its ability to conduct
intelligence operations.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We sit down with
former CIA
Director Leon Panetta to talk
about the WikiLeaks
documents and what it says about
the nation's
top intelligence agency.
And Miles O'Brien takes us to
Antarctica,
where a growing crack threatens
to create
one of the largest icebergs in
history.
KELLY BRUNT, University of
Maryland: What
we're talking about is a calving
of an iceberg
that's a size of a state.
To get that, you really need a
satellite to
be able to see all of it in one
shot.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Republican
bill to replace
Obamacare has officially begun
its journey
through Congress today.
Republican leaders and the White
House are
pushing it, against opposition,
not only from
Democrats, but also conservative
critics and
powerful interest groups.
Lisa Desjardins reports on the
day's events.
REP.
PAUL RYAN (R-WI), Speaker of the
House: This
is a good day.
LISA DESJARDINS: House Speaker
Paul Ryan was
soaringly optimistic this
morning, defending
the GOP health care plan that
some conservatives
have called it Obamacare lite.
REP.
PAUL RYAN: This is what good
conservative
health care reform looks like.
It is bold and it is long
overdue.
And it is us fulfilling our
promises.
LISA DESJARDINS: This as two
committees started
slogging through the bill
section by section,
as Democrats and Republicans
fought over procedure
and amendments.
MAN: Excuse me.
If you would suspend, we're
going to move
to forward with the regular
order.
LISA DESJARDINS: If you knew
where to look,
you could see in the audience
signs of the
larger battle fully under way.
At the Energy and Commerce
Committee, we saw
representatives of doctors
groups, like this
woman from the American Academy
of Family
Physicians, and of hospitals,
like this lawyer
whose firm represents several,
also biotech
interests, including this man
from well-known
company, Genentech.
Democrats like Raul Ruiz, a
doctor himself,
are highlighting some of those
groups' reactions.
REP.
RAUL RUIZ (D), California: The
American Medical
Association came out strongly
against this
bill this morning.
As you know, they represent --
they are the
largest organized group that
represents physicians
in the s United States.
LISA DESJARDINS: The AMA
specifically said
the bill would -- quote --
"result in millions
of Americans losing coverage and
benefits."
Another major group, the AARP,
also is opposed,
saying the plan would
dramatically increase
costs for people between the
ages of 50 and
64.
But the U.S. Chamber of Commerce
praised the
plan, calling it absolutely
critical in restoring
health care markets.
At the White House, Press
Secretary Sean Spicer
read his own list of supportive
groups, and
then dismissed the list of
doctors and other
organizations opposed so far.
SEAN SPICER, White House Press
Secretary:
This isn't about trying to
figure out how
many special interests in
Washington we can
get paid off.
It's about making sure that
patients get the
best deal.
LISA DESJARDINS: Meantime,
multiple analysts
have concluded the GOP bill will
leave millions
more without health coverage.
Spicer responded to that by
questioning a
main arbiter, the nonpartisan
Congressional
Budget Office, which has not yet
released
its estimate.
SEAN SPICER: If you're looking
at the CBO
for accuracy, you're looking in
the wrong
place.
They were way, way off last
time, in every
aspect of how they scored and
projected Obamacare.
LISA DESJARDINS: Spicer said the
White House
will begin a full-court press on
the bill.
That started late this afternoon
as President
Trump met with conservatives.
Republicans in Congress are
aware that they
have critics on the left and
within their
own camp on the right, but they
are not yet
showing any sweat.
REP.
CATHY MCMORRIS RODGERS (R),
Washington: This
is just the beginning of the
process, and
this is the way legislating
takes place.
LISA DESJARDINS: It is a
tedious, but important
week.
House committees may take until
Friday to
work through the bill.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Lisa
Desjardins
at the U.S. Capitol.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the day's
other news: Heavily
armed gunmen disguised in white
lab coats
stormed a military hospital in
Kabul, Afghanistan,
and killed at least 30 people.
The Islamic State group claimed
responsibility.
Footage from the scene showed
Afghan soldiers
rushing to the complex as
helicopters landed
on the roof to rescue trapped
victims.
The fighting lasted for hours.
Meanwhile, two suicide bombers
in Iraq killed
at least 23 people at a wedding
party.
The U.S. military publicly
accused Russia
today of deploying a land-based
cruise missile
that violates a nuclear arms
treaty.
Air Force General Paul Selva is
vice chairman
of the Joints Chiefs of Staff.
He told a House hearing that
Moscow broke
the spirit and intent of a 1987
agreement,
in a bid to pressure the U.S.
and its allies.
GEN.
PAUL SELVA, Vice Chairman, Joint
Chiefs of
Staff: The system itself
presents a risk to
most of our facilities in
Europe, and we believe
that the Russians have
deliberately deployed
it in order to pose a threat to
NATO and to
facilities within the NATO area
of responsibility.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Obama
administration had
previously accused Russia of
breaking the
treaty.
The Kremlin has rejected the
U.S. complaints.
This was International Women's
Day, and, in
the United States, A Day Without
a Woman.
Organizers called for women to
stay off the
job and protest for pay equity
and against
a ban on funding international
groups that
offer abortions.
It is a follow-up to the mass
marches after
President Trump took office.
We will have a full report later
in the program.
Crews battling wildfires in the
Plains states
made some headway today as winds
eased slightly.
The fires have been burning this
week across
Kansas, Oklahoma, Texas, and
Colorado.
They have killed at least six
people so far,
and scorched more than a million
acres of
land.
In Guatemala, at least 19 girls
died today
in a fire at a shelter for
abused teenagers.
Police said some of the teens
set fires to
protest overcrowding.
In the aftermath, relatives
gathered outside
the government-run center near
Guatemala City,
demanding answers.
WOMAN (through translator): It
was lit.
I don't know what it was, but
mattresses were
lit, since last night.
There are many children who have
burns; 19
are dead.
They haven't given us an
explanation, and
they don't let us go in.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The facility has
been criticized
for overcrowding and other
problems.
The U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs is
moving to offer mental health
care to vets
that receive less-than-honorable
discharges.
VA Secretary David Shulkin made
the announcement
at a congressional hearing last
night.
It is part of a new effort to
prevent suicides.
Thousands of former service
members could
be affected.
In the city of Los Angeles,
Mayor Eric Garcetti
has won a second term, easily
beating 10 rivals
in Tuesday's election.
Just 250,000 voters turned out
in the nation's
second largest city.
Garcetti, a Democrat, claimed 81
percent of
the vote, and said it's a
victory for an all-inclusive
ideal.
ERIC GARCETTI (D), Mayor of Los
Angeles: Everybody,
regardless of their religion,
regardless of
their race or ethnicity,
regardless of their
legal status, regardless of whom
they love,
regardless of where they come
from, is a part
of this Los Angeles dream and
always will
be as long as I am your mayor.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Under Garcetti,
downtown Los
Angeles has seen a rebirth, but
the city's
poverty and homeless rates
remain high, and
violent crime has risen for
three years running.
FBI Director James Comey served
notice today
that he means to finish out his
10-year term.
In a Boston speech, he joked,
"You're stuck
with me for about another
six-and-a-half years."
Comey became a lightning rod
over his handling
of the Hillary Clinton e-mail
investigation
last year.
And last weekend, he urged the
Justice Department
to reject President Trump's
claim that President
Obama tapped his phones.
China has approved 38 new
trademarks for the
Trump family company.
The announcement today covers an
array of
potential enterprises, from
hotels, to golf
clubs, to a class of businesses
that includes
escort services.
Trump Organization lawyers
applied for the
Trump trademarks last April.
China also reports that it ran a
trade deficit
last month, for the first time
in three years.
It could signal improving
economic growth.
Meanwhile, Wall Street mostly
gave ground
today.
The Dow Jones industrial average
lost 69 points
to close at 20855.
The Nasdaq rose three points,
and the S&P
500 dropped five.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
a former
CIA director on what the
WikiLeaks documents
mean for the agency; women show
their economic
strength by striking across the
nation; how
a growing Antarctic rift could
create one
of the biggest icebergs in
history; and much
more.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Yesterday's
WikiLeaks dump
of documents was yet another
major breach
of classified information inside
U.S. intelligence
services.
Hari Sreenivasan picks up our
story.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Today, the
story about intelligence
leaks advanced on multiple
fronts.
Reuters reported intelligence
officials have
known about the security breach
since last
year, and are focused on
contractors as the
likeliest source of the leak.
And White House Press Secretary
Sean Spicer
said President Trump is
extremely concerned
about the breach.
For more on all of this, we turn
to Leon Panetta.
He served as the CIA director
during the Obama
administration.
Mr. Panetta, first, what's
happening in the
CIA right now?
If it's a mole, how do they find
him, if it's
an inside job, him or her?
Or, if it's from the outside,
how do we figure
out where we were hacked?
LEON PANETTA, Former U.S.
Secretary of Defense:
Well, I think the more important
issue is
going to be, how do you replace
those important
tools that have now been made
public and try
to reestablish our intelligence
capability,
so we can gather the information
that is absolutely
essential in order to protect
our country?
This has been seriously damaging
to the CIA
and its ability to conduct
intelligence operations.
So, I would imagine the first
focus is on,
what do we do to try to replace
our ability
to go after terrorists?
HARI SREENIVASAN: You know, we
had Chelsea
Manning from the Army.
We had Edward Snowden and Harold
Martin from
the NSA.
Weren't there reforms taken
after these things?
Why didn't they work?
LEON PANETTA: You know, I'm sure
there were
steps taken to try to make sure
that this
wouldn't happen.
But we are, clearly, living in a
world in
which the ability to hack has
developed to
a point where I happen to think
that probably
anything is vulnerable today.
So I think you try to take steps
to try to
protect that kind of sensitive
information,
try to do what you can to make
sure that those
who are working for you are
taking steps to
protect it, contractors are
protect it.
But the bottom line is that, in
today's world,
I think you always have to be
prepared that
somebody may very well be able
to get access
to that kind of information and,
if they do,
that they will make it public.
I think that's the world we live
in right
now.
HARI SREENIVASAN: You know, I
think it caught
a lot of people by surprise that
the CIA has
such an extensive hacking
operation.
Don't we have the NSA for that?
Why is the CIA doing this?
LEON PANETTA: Well, the CIA does
it for intelligence-gathering
purposes abroad.
It's not done here in the United
States.
It's done abroad.
And, for that reason, the CIA
has to develop
the capabilities that it has
developed in
order to be able to track those
that are known
suspects of terrorism.
You know, we went through 9/11.
There was a national commission
that was established
to find out why we were attacked
on 9/11.
And the result of that is that
the CIA and
other intelligence agencies
developed better
capabilities to go after
terrorists and to
try to locate them.
There is a reason we have not
had another
9/11 attack in this country, and
a lot of
that is because our intelligence
agencies,
our law enforcement agencies are
sharing information
and gathering information that
makes sure
we protect the United States.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Speaking of
sharing information,
back in 2010, when you were
still CIA director,
the Obama administration said
that they would
share zero day vulnerabilities,
those hacks
that are core in pieces of
software, like
in an Apple iPhone or an Android
operating
system, with the technology
companies.
But, here, we have evidence that
the CIA has
hoarded a lot of those zero day
vulnerabilities
and really violated that trust.
LEON PANETTA: Well, I have to
tell you, at
least in my time as director of
the CIA, that
we had a very good relationship
with Silicon
Valley and with high-tech
companies.
And, you know, we had a
cooperative relationship.
Obviously, they have their
interests, and
we respect that.
They are dealing with privacy
issues, and
we respect that as well.
But, in the end, all of us are
concerned about
being able to ensure that we are
able to go
after terrorists, that we're
able to detect
when they are planning attacks
on this country
and elsewhere, and that we are
able to take
steps to protect this country.
And I think what we have to do
is make sure
that we get back to that kind of
cooperative
relationship.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The thing that
has a lot
of people concerned is, when you
keep these
zero day vulnerabilities to
yourself, and
you don't tell Apple or you
don't tell Google
or you don't tell Microsoft,
hey, there's
this hole in your software, that
means that
identity thieves, other
governments could
also be using this.
I think there's also general
discomfort, to
put it mildly, with consumers,
who say, wait
a minute, I thought that my
product was safe,
but here I don't necessarily
know whether
it's even -- my government's
look out for
my best interests.
LEON PANETTA: Well, again, I
think the fundamental
issue that's involved here is
whether or not
we want our intelligence
agencies and our
law enforcement agencies to be
able to protect
our country.
And I know that there are
there's often this
debate about, are we going to be
able to protect
our security and our freedoms at
the same
time?
I believe we can.
I don't think we have to make a
choice on
that.
The reality is that what the CIA
has done
in terms of its capabilities and
what it is
able to do is done pursuant to
the law and
is done pursuant to oversight by
the Congress
and by the Intelligence
Committees on the
hill.
They are fully aware of what
capabilities
the CIA has, and that is the way
we try to
protect our freedoms at the same
time.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Former Defense
Secretary
and former head of the CIA,
among many other
things, Leon Panetta, thanks so
much for joining
us.
LEON PANETTA: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: At least 13
protesters were
arrested in New York City today,
as strikes
and rallies unfolded across the
globe in the
name of women.
International Women's Day became
A Day Without
Women in some American cities.
Thousands stayed away from work
and took to
the streets partly to
demonstrate contributions
that women make to the economy.
NELINI STAMP, Protester: There
is a massive
resistance movement that is
growing.
We are a part of it.
But we need to put our bodies on
our line.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In Washington, a
march to the
White House targeted a
reinstatement of the
so-called global gag rule.
It denies foreign aid to groups
that provide
abortions or related services.
SERRA SIPPEL, President, CHANGE:
This is about
denying health providers from
providing health
care, just information about
women's options
and choices.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Overall, the
marches were smaller
than the one million or so who
turned out
after President Trump's
inauguration, but
leading women in Congress
appeared outside
the Capitol dressed in red, the
color associated
with the labor movement and
today's strike.
California Democrat Barbara Lee
pushed back
against criticism that only
privileged women
could afford to stay home.
REP.
BARBARA LEE (D), California: We
also recognize
that there are millions of women
are unable
to walk out because they might
get fired or
cannot afford to lose their
meager incomes.
So, we walked out for them, too.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Teachers at the
Washington
rally said much the same, as the
strike forced
some school systems to close,
leaving families
to find last-minute child care.
KELLI WRIGHT, Teacher: There's
power in numbers.
And I happen to work for a
school district
that had to close because we all
took leave.
So, if we just keep fighting for
stuff like
this and we stand our ground,
then change
can come.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Later, another
crowd rallied
at the Department of Labor,
calling for pay
equity and other rights, at a
time when American
women earn 80 cents for every
dollar a man
makes.
President Trump tweeted a
general statement
of support this morning.
"I have tremendous respect for
women," he
said, "and the many roles they
serve that
are vital to the fabric of our
society and
our economy."
And first lady Melania Trump and
the president's
daughter Ivanka hosted a small
White House
luncheon in honor of the day.
Meanwhile, protests played out
internationally,
from Mexico City, to Istanbul,
Turkey.
For more on the women's movement
and what
today's events represent, we
turn to Farida
Jalalzai.
She's author of the book
"Shattered, Cracked
and Firmly Intact: Women and the
Executive
Glass Ceiling Worldwide."
She teaches political science at
Oklahoma
State University.
And Rebecca Traister,
writer-at-large for
"New York" magazine and author
of the book
"All the Single ladies:
Unmarried Women and
the Rise of An Independent
Nation."
And we welcome both of you to
the program.
I'm going to start with you,
Farida Jalalzai.
What do you think today's
protests marches
say about the state of the
women's movement
in this country right now?
FARIDA JALALZAI, Oklahoma State
University:
I think it states that it's
essentially strong.
It's burgeoning.
I think it's a moment that women
have seized
on to say, we're not going to
just stop the
post-inauguration activities.
We're here.
We're trying to build on
momentum, and we're
trying to bring to the floor
lots of different
issues that are about women's
empowerment.
But, in many ways, it's larger
than that.
And so I'm very optimistic, from
what I have
actually seen as an academic,
thinking that
it could have just been a point
that fizzled.
And I'm seeing that there's this
building
of strength and just even
conversations that
we're having today that we
wouldn't have had
a year ago, actually.
I'm very surprised, and
pleasantly so.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Rebecca Traister,
you're nodding
your head.
What is it about today?
I mean, there were marches in
some places,
not everywhere.
What did it say?
REBECCA TRAISTER, Author, "All
The Single
Ladies: Unmarried Women and the
Rise of an
Independent Nation": Well, I
think -- I think
it says that the kind of mass
reaction and
mass resistance that we saw in
such huge numbers
in January is -- it remains,
that women are
engaged politically, that
they're interested
in working together.
As Farida said, it's not --
these are not
issues we're seeing anymore in
the way that
we have historically, as
compartmentalized,
as just about reproductive
rights.
You had a reproductive rights
demonstration.
You had a wage demonstration.
This is in concert with women
who have been
striking around the world.
There is an international --
there is history
of this strike and this movement
around the
world.
This is the United States
working in solidarity
with women globally, which is
new on this
scale.
And I think what you're seeing
is women in
huge numbers participating in
political resistance
and raising their voices in ways
that we have
not seen in decades in this
country.
And it wasn't a one-off in
January.
You see another mass uprising
today.
JUDY WOODRUFF: At the same time,
Farida Jalalzai,
what percentage of American
women are represented
by something like what happened
today?
We know not every woman's views
are represented
here.
FARIDA JALALZAI: Well, you're
not going to
represent everybody's views, but
I don't think
that the conversation has been
limiting at
all in terms of being more
broad.
In fact, I think it's just been
the opposite,
where, when you look at the
leadership, say,
for example, of the women's
march in D.C.,
this was led by and it spoke to
lots of diverse
women.
And if we can't capture all
women, you know,
that's something that it can't
be disappointing,
because there's no way that we
could capture
every single heart and mind of
every single
woman, but that it's, I think,
more broad
than what we would maybe expect
it to be,
maybe limited to maybe white,
privileged,
upper-class women.
It's not.
The discussion and I think the
representation
has actually been much broader.
And, in many respects, it's
because the demands
have been there for it to be
broad.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Rebecca Traister,
how much
room is there in the women's
movement for
debate and discussion around
questions like
pay equity, equal rights for
women, and all
of its interpretations?
REBECCA TRAISTER: Well, the
women's movement
itself has always been, by
definition, cacophonous,
full of dissent.
It's been motivated by dissent.
In part, that's because it's a
majority movement.
When you talk about women's
liberation or
women's equality, you're talking
about the
liberation and equality of more
than half
of our population.
And when you try to organize
around a majority,
what you get is an enormous
array of perspectives,
experiences, races, classes,
economic positions.
And, of course, if you're going
to try to
work on a movement that extends
to represent
all those different positions
and perspectives,
it's going to be full of
dissent, and differ
people thinking that we should
operate in
different ways.
That's a sign that the movement
is healthy.
And I think it is -- the fact
that there is
dissent within those -- amongst
the people
who are participating is a sign
that people
are engaged and feel passionate
about taking
a hand in what direction we're
going to go.
The fact that women oppose it as
well, you
know, that there are
conservative women, we
wouldn't have had patriarchal
power structures
if there weren't women there to
support it.
That's nothing new.
There are always going to be
women who in
some way disagree about the
direction that
women's rights should go.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Farida Jalalzai,
both of you
are suggesting the women's
movement of today
is a movement that has evolved
since the '60s
and the -- 1960s and 1970s.
How do you measure success for
the kinds of
statements these women today are
making?
FARIDA JALALZAI: That's a really
difficult
question to answer, but I will
give it my
best shot.
Measuring success, sustained
activity, asking,
claiming different aspects of
representation
be represented fully.
I think a lot of it is raising a
lot of these
policy areas and being broad,
and not just
focusing on even women's
empowerment, but
how do you empower marginalized
groups?
And part of it does have to, I
think, in some
ways, be linked to the political
elites.
You know, there's a lot to be
gained from
mass movements.
And I would like that to also be
in accordance
with more women actually running
and attempting
to be the lawmakers.
And I have this belief that,
when you have
women towards maybe the bottom
end as citizens
who are articulating demands,
that I also
want to see greater
representation of women
within political -- the
political realm as
policy-makers.
And, to me, that's the success,
the sustained
conversation, the policies that
are ultimately
proposed and hopefully passed,
and also the
ways that we can say the
diversity amongst
public officials has broadened,
to include
people of different genders and
races.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
Rebecca Traister, what about
that?
How do you measure -- clearly,
part of this
is getting more women elected
with these views,
but what more?
REBECCA TRAISTER: More women
elected, more
women running, even if they
don't -- more
women participating in the
process.
And the other half of that,
which we have
seen in an unprecedented way --
not in my
memory have I ever seen so many
people participating
in the act of political
resistance, not just
the demonstrations, but the
calling and writing
their representatives, finding
out about policy
and legislation.
I have never seen so many
people, women and
men, as politically engaged as
they have been.
And we can see some of the
fruits of that
being brought to bear.
We see public officials being
hesitant on
health care reform, you know, on
repealing
Obamacare.
A month ago, I would have sat
here and told
you that's going to be the first
-- they have
been promising they're going to
repeal it.
It's a bad idea.
The numbers of people who are
calling their
representatives and saying,
don't do this,
who are holding town halls, and
that is being
enabled by the mass women's
movement, because
the success of the marches and
protests like
this are making people feel
like, wait, I
want to be a part of this
movement that resists
this power structure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we see a
lot of energy
around what's going on today.
REBECCA TRAISTER: That's the
crucial thing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And today is just
a snapshot.
It's something we're going to
continue to
watch.
Rebecca Traister, Farida
Jalalzai, thank you
both.
FARIDA JALALZAI: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": a
closer look
at the details of the Republican
plan to replace
the Affordable Care Act; and a
new exhibit
explores America's enduring
fascination with
poet Emily Dickinson.
But first: There's a giant crack
in an ice
shelf of the Antarctic that's
been the source
of much attention this winter,
and is raising
new concerns over the larger
stability of
the ice there.
Miles O'Brien has the story, the
focus of
this week's Leading Edge.
MILES O'BRIEN: If glaciology is
all that it
is cracked up to be, this long,
fast-growing
rift in the Antarctic ice is a
huge iceberg
in the making, one of the
largest ever seen,
about the size of Delaware.
Welcome to the Larsen Sea Ice
Shelf, teetering
on the edge of breaking away
from the glacier.
So, we have known about this for
quite a while,
right?
KELLY BRUNT, University of
Maryland: We have
certainly known about the bulk
of this rift
for a while.
It's this accelerated
propagation that's really
new.
MILES O'BRIEN: It's moving fast.
KELLY BRUNT: Moving fast.
MILES O'BRIEN: Kelly Brunt is a
glaciologist
at the University of Maryland
and NASA's Goddard
Space Flight Center.
She used a wall of monitors
there to show
me the growing rift, fueled in
part by rising
air and sea temperatures.
If the glaciers in West
Antarctica all dropped
into the water, global sea level
would rise
by more than 15 feet.
Brunt showed me the big picture,
a composite
of images from several
satellites.
This is how the glacier ice
flows here.
KELLY BRUNT: Ice flows from the
center of
the continent out to the edges,
much like
syrup on the center of your
pancake flowing
towards the edges.
And you can see there are areas
where it's
moving pretty slowly, and then
there are areas
where it's moving very quickly.
And those quick places are
generally in our
areas of ice shelves.
MILES O'BRIEN: So, when we think
about ice,
we think about something static.
It's not static, is it?
KELLY BRUNT: Not at all.
Actually, it's highly dynamic.
You can see from this image it
looks to me
a lot like a river system.
MILES O'BRIEN: Ice shelves are
connected to
the glaciers that sit on land,
but they are
also floating, like ice cubes in
a glass of
water.
KELLY BRUNT: If you had a drink
with ice cubes
in it, as those ice cube melts,
they don't
add to the height of the water
in the glass.
So when ice shelves break down
and collapse,
they do not have a direct impact
on mean sea
level rise.
However, they have an indirect
effect.
These ice shelves buttress the
flow of the
ice upstream, the ice that's
flowing into
the system.
And when you lose that
buttressing force,
you allow the upstream glaciers
to flow faster.
So that's similar to putting
more ice cubes
into the glass and letting those
melt.
MILES O'BRIEN: Ice falls off the
edge of glaciers
all the time.
It is part of a natural process
called calving.
Kelly Brunt says it is important
to judge
the size of the piece that
breaks off relative
to the size of the glacier that
is behind
it.
She says your fingernails offer
a handy model.
KELLY BRUNT: If you break your
fingernail
inside the white part of your
fingernail,
you probably don't think much of
it.
If you break it below the white
part, you
put a Band-Aid on it, you think
about it and
you keep an eye on it.
If you lose your whole
fingernail, I don't
know what happens.
It's pretty catastrophic.
This represents losing the whole
fingernail.
MILES O'BRIEN: Like so many
features in Antarctica,
the Larsen Ice Shelf is named
for a famous
19th century explorer.
And it is disappearing, section
by section,
identified by letters.
Larsen A disintegrated in 1995.
And, in 2002, a series of
satellite images
captured the end of Larsen B in
dramatic fashion
over the course of six weeks.
The piece that broke off was the
size of Rhode
Island.
KELLY BRUNT: Losing this much
ice, losing
ice that represents roughly the
state of Rhode
Island in a month-and-a-half,
just far exceeded
anybody's expectations of what
could happen
in the time scale that it could
happen.
MILES O'BRIEN: So, it was kind
of like, we
have to rethink things here a
little bit.
I mean, this is a wakeup call.
KELLY BRUNT: This was absolutely
a wakeup
call.
MILES O'BRIEN: Scientists track
the ice using
a half-dozen U.S. and European
satellites,
including Landsat, which
gathered these images.
But some of their best data came
from a satellite
called ICESat.
Launched in 2003, it ceased
operation in 2009.
It precisely measured the
glaciers using laser
beams.
KELLY BRUNT: This is quite a few
years of
ICESat data merged together to
get a sense
in meters per year how our ice
sheet is changing.
And you can see, the big picture
here is that
our ice sheets are changing
where they are
in contact with both our warming
atmosphere
and a warming ocean.
So, it's basically along the
fringe of the
continent.
MILES O'BRIEN: When ICESat
failed, NASA started
tracking the ice using radar and
lasers on
board low-flying aircraft.
The IceBridge program is NASA's
largest air
campaign ever, but it still
could not match
the eye above the sky.
It goes without saying that you
would view
these satellites, the capability
to look at
this, as essential?
KELLY BRUNT: What we're talking
about is a
calving of an iceberg that's a
size of a state.
To get that, you really need a
satellite to
be able to see all of it in one
shot.
It's a function of scale and
repeatability
to go back and look at that area
again with
the satellite that makes these
the perfect
tools for looking at the
large-scale change
that we're seeing in this
region.
MILES O'BRIEN: Next year, NASA
plans to launch
a new and improved satellite to
watch the
ice.
Most likely, the Larsen C Ice
Shelf will be
long gone by then.
As the climate warms, there is
no end in sight
to the steady loss of ice here.
Miles O'Brien, the "PBS
NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now a closer look
at what could
change if the Affordable Care
Act, often referred
to as Obamacare, is repealed and
replaced.
The battle is expected to last
through the
spring, or longer.
Tonight, we are starting an
occasional series
on the potential impact if the
current Republican
leadership plan becomes law.
First up, the tax credits that
go to uninsured
people to enable them to buy
coverage.
To qualify under the current
law, this is
dependent on your income and
where you live.
The Republican bill is shifting
those criteria.
Income matters, but age is much
more crucial.
To get a refundable tax credit,
some people
over 60 could qualify for $4,000
a year.
Those between 40 and 50 years
old could qualify
for $3,000 a year.
People under 30 could get
$2,000.
Here's the chairman of the House
Ways and
Means Committee, Kevin Brady,
talking about
the Republican approach.
REP.
KEVIN BRADY (R), Texas: I think
a key element
of the tax credit is that it is
really targeted
and tailored to the individual.
It is a credit that is
immediately available
to them.
It grows and increases with age
because your
health care costs go up as you
get older.
JUDY WOODRUFF: To help break all
this down,
I'm joined by Julie Rovner of
Kaiser Health
News.
She follows this closely.
Welcome back to the program,
Julie.
So, why did the Republicans
decide to change
these criteria?
JULIE ROVNER, Kaiser Health
News: Well, one
of the problems with the
existing credits
is that not enough young,
healthy people were
signing up.
So this is an effort to say, we
want to get
more young, healthy people into
the pool.
And, now, while the credits are
smaller for
younger people, they're also
going to reduce
their premiums by changing how
insurers can
charge.
Right now, insurers can only
charge three
times as much for older people
as younger
people.
They're going to make that five
times as much.
So that's going to make premiums
much less
expensive for the younger
people, hence, even
the smaller tax credit will go
further.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So how much is
this expected
to change the group of people
who then will
be able to be eligible for the
tax credit?
JULIE ROVNER: Well, it's not
entirely clear.
It's going to change who are
winners and losers.
Older people will, obviously,
have to pay
more.
Even though they get twice as
big a tax credit,
they could be charged five times
as much in
premiums.
So it's not at all clear that
it's going to
entice that many more younger
people to join
up.
Republicans also wanted to sort
of scale back
how complicated the tax credits
are under
the current Affordable Care Act,
and this
would definitely do that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Do we have a way
of knowing
how much premiums would change
in cost?
JULIE ROVNER: Well, we don't,
other than the
facts that premiums could --
premiums could
change for a lot of different
reasons.
But one of the important things
here is that
premiums vary by where you live
because health
care cost different amounts in
different parts
of the country.
So, if you live in a low-cost
part of the
country, that same flat tax
credit would go
much further than if you live in
a much more
expensive part of the country.
The current Affordable Care Act
tax credits
take that into account, because
they are based
on how much the insurance costs
in your area.
These are not.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, that
geography issue is
another significant change here.
JULIE ROVNER: That's right.
It's really the way it all acts
together.
It's not just the tax credits.
It's the tax credits, plus what
they're based
on, plus how old you are, plus
where you live,
and a little bit of income.
The Affordable Care Act tax
credits are based
almost exclusively on your
income.
They basically say you only have
to spend
a certain percentage of your
income to afford
health insurance.
That's not what these tax
credits would do.
And the Republicans hope that
there would
be insurance available that
would match or
at least almost match these tax
credits, so
that people could afford to buy
coverage.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, we see,
Julie, that among
the more conservative
Republicans, they are
still unhappy with this
approach.
JULIE ROVNER: They are very
unhappy.
They call it Obamacare-lite.
They are tax credits.
They're available to people even
who don't
owe any taxes.
And Republicans say that's a new
entitlement,
and why should they be voting
for a new entitlement,
if they were going to repeal the
old one?
JUDY WOODRUFF: And the
leadership defense
of it is what?
JULIE ROVNER: Well, the
leadership defense
of it is, they want people --
they don't want
to throw people off of their
coverage.
There are a lot of people who
got coverage
based on the existing tax
credits.
There might be different people
who could
afford insurance on the new tax
credits, but
at least they wouldn't be taking
them away
and telling everybody, we're not
going to
be giving you any help anymore.
You're on your own.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And quickly,
Julie, under this
new proposal, would there be a
lapse in coverage,
some kind of penalty?
What is in there to protect
people who are
now covered?
JULIE ROVNER: Well, rather the
individual
mandate, where people are
required to either
have coverage or pay a penalty,
what this
says is, if you have a lapse of
more than
63 days, and then you sign up
again, you have
to pay 30 percent more for a
year.
So, there would be a penalty
when you re-up,
basically, instead of a penalty
for not having
coverage.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Julie Rovner, we
thank you.
JULIE ROVNER: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And next time,
we're going
to take a closer look at the
Medicaid changes
proposed in the American Health
Care Act.
And we will be back shortly with
a look at
a new exhibit about Emily
Dickinson.
But, first, take a moment to
hear from your
local PBS station.
It's a chance to offer your
support, which
helps keep programs like ours on
the air.
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally tonight,
on this International
Women's Day, she is as beloved
as ever.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally tonight,
on this International
Women's Day, she is as beloved
as ever.
And now, the poet Emily
Dickinson is getting
even more attention and a new
look, in books,
online, on film, and in a major
museum exhibition.
Jeffrey Brown reports from New
York.
JEFFREY BROWN: She is at once
among the most
known and most mysterious of
American cultural
figures, Emily Dickinson,
subject of an exhibition
at the Morgan Library and Museum
in New York
titled, "I'm Nobody!
Who Are You?" the first line of
one of her
most famous poems.
Who was Emily Dickinson?
Scholar Marta Werner offers
this:
MARTA WERNER, D'Youville
College: She is a
constant summons to me to think
about language
and its preciseness, and not
only its preciseness,
but its power.
WOMAN: These are the days when
skies resumed
the old.
JEFFREY BROWN: Here, visitors
can listen to
readings of the poems, while
examining remnants
of a circumscribed 19th century
life lived
almost completely in one town,
Amherst, Massachusetts,
the only known painting of
Dickinson as a
child with her siblings, a
daguerreotype of
her as a young woman, the only
authenticated
photo of the poet.
There's also a lock of her
auburn hair, a
replica of cut and pressed
botanical specimens,
and another of the rose
wallpaper in the bedroom
to which she retreated in her
later years.
This exhibition, with some 100
rarely seen
items, is eager to present a
different, fresh
take on Dickinson.
Curator Carolyn Vega:
CAROLYN VEGA, Curator: The
stereotype that
was attached to her very early
on of this
total recluse, of this woman in
white who
never left her bedroom, who
penned these amazing
verses, like, in a vacuum
almost, in total
seclusion, has really stuck to
her.
JEFFREY BROWN: You're fighting
that?
CAROLYN VEGA: Yes, we're
fighting that, or
just bringing it into context a
little bit.
JEFFREY BROWN: This Emily
Dickinson engaged
with her times, including the
Civil War years,
through her reading and a
constant correspondence
with friends, leading thinkers,
and others.
Often, she sent poems,
sentences, stanzas
and entire poems written on
scraps of paper
and envelopes, even chocolate
wrappers, a
new book, "Envelope Poems," as
well as the
recent "The Gorgeous Nothings,"
document this
aspect of her work.
SUSAN HOWE, Poet: By God, she
broke the glass
ceiling in poetry.
And Emily Dickinson is like a
beacon of verbal
power that will not be silenced.
JEFFREY BROWN: For Susan Howe, a
leading contemporary
poet and Dickinson scholar, the
powerful voice
of Dickinson is best heard and
seen in these
original manuscripts, the
unusual line breaks,
alternative word choices, poems
as virtual
works of art.
SUSAN HOWE: Ultimately, she
leads me to the
fundamental mystery of all
poetry, which is
the relation between the ear and
the eye.
Every mark on paper is an
acoustic mark.
Dickinson breaks down the
barriers between
poetry, prose and ear and eye.
Dickinson breaks down the
barriers between
poetry, prose and ear and eye.
JEFFREY BROWN: Marta Werner, a
leader expert
on Dickinson's manuscripts,
showed me an example.
MARTA WERNER: She talks about
wanting to hinder
time.
And as the poem unfolds, the way
that the
writing almost stumbles, right,
performs that
hindering of time, but you're
seeing, to some
extent, the mind thinking.
JEFFREY BROWN: The first
editions of Dickinson's
poetry came out only after her
death in 1886,
and, from the beginning, editors
ignored her
idiosyncrasies and formatted her
writings
into a more conventional style.
She wrote some 1,800 poems, but
only 10 were
published in newspapers during
her lifetime.
MARTA WERNER: It's unsigned.
It's anonymous.
Her name, you know, never
appeared in print
during her lifetime with any of
her poems.
It's dropped in, in the middle
of this other
column.
What comes after it is a little
piece on how
to use chloroform.
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: Dickinson was
thought to be
reticent about seeing her work,
as well as
her image in public, so we can
only wonder
what she'd think of "A Quiet
Passion," a film
due in April starring Cynthia
Nixon.
But there's no denying the
continuing fascination
with the woman and love of her
work, as at
marathon readings put on by the
Library of
Congress, and the restoration
under way of
her Amherst home.
And now both scholars and
everyday fans have
access to a trove of original
manuscripts
and more online, digitized from
the collections
of Amherst College, Harvard
University and
the Boston Public Library.
Marta Werner offered a personal
story that
drove home the connection many
feel, how her
dying father, a scientist,
shared his favorite
poems.
MARTA WERNER: It was his idea.
He started to write me letters.
And then he would ask me to send
back my list
of poems.
This was a very extraordinary
thing.
I think there's a lot of people
like my father
who love her and can't quite say
why.
JEFFREY BROWN: The enduring
power and mystery
of one of America's greatest
poets.
JEFFREY BROWN: The enduring
power and mystery
of one of America's greatest
poets.
From
the Morgan Library and Museum in
New York,
I'm Jeffrey Brown for the "PBS
NewsHour."
the Morgan Library and Museum in
New York,
I'm Jeffrey Brown for the "PBS
NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
online right
now: Acclaimed writer Jonathan
Franzen pays
tribute to Paula Fox, a
prize-winning author
for adults and children alike,
who died last
tribute to Paula Fox, a
prize-winning author
for adults and children alike,
who died last
week at the age of 93.
Franzen talked to Jeffrey Brown
about finding
inspiration in
Franzen talked to Jeffrey Brown
about finding
inspiration in
her work and in their
friendship.
All that
and more is
on our Web site,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
And a quick correction before we
go.
In
the report tonight on the new
Republican health
care bill, we misidentified a
woman in
the report tonight on the new
Republican health
care bill, we misidentified a
woman in
the audience at today's
congressional hearing
as from the American Academy of
Family Physicians.
the audience at today's
congressional hearing
as from the American Academy of
Family Physicians.
We apologize for the error.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening, Making Sense of how
testosterone
and anger are indicators of CEO
success.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and we will see you soon.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and we will see you soon.